All right, guess what, we're finally at the end of this module.
It is the largest module of the entire course, at least at the time of this recording.
Personally, I think it's a fantastic module because I've had a chance to show you, I think so much
that I've always wanted to make sure that developers that I've worked with and managed on my own teams
actually understood and knew.
And so now you've had an opportunity to be exposed to all of these fundamental and foundational skills
and techniques and technologies that are related to relational database programming and data.
ABC.
So in this last lesson, I mostly just want to recap what we've gone over.
And I also want to let you know a little bit about a few of the things that I didn't go into or that
I didn't go into.
Very much so that you kind of have an understanding of what might be left.
OK.
So let me just summarize some of what we went over.
First off, we started off by doing all of this development in this module using TDD or test driven
development.
And we used the G-Unit unit framework to do that.
We also brought in an add on framework, which is a cert j.
One thing that I did not explicitly mention, though throughout this entire module is more specifically
the type of testing we've been doing.
So yes, we've been doing TDD, but one distinction that I did not make or call out was the fact that
the vast majority of the testing we've done in this module is not technically unit testing unit testing
as the general term that you will usually hear for the most common type of testing you can do.
However, most of what we've done, I'd say 98 percent of the tests that we've written are not technically
unit tests.
They are actually called integration tests.
And let me just call out the distinction here.
Unit tests are typically tests that mostly only test one class.
OK, so we do have an example of one unit test if we jump over here into the UI and I'll jump over to
our person class.
Well, actually, I don't have to go to the person class.
We created a test class for the person class called person test.
These two tests here are strictly unit tests.
They only test the functionality that exists within our person class, and they don't go any further
than that.
However, if I go back to our other main test class where we've where we've written the vast majority
of our tests, the people repository test class, the tests in here are not technically unit tests at
all.
They are called integration tests, and the reason that they are considered integration tests is because
they're actually testing a wider range of functionality than what's just in one test class to a certain
degree, and they depend on other systems being available to even work.
Mainly, they depend on the database actually existing.
So we're testing the integration between our database and the repository classes themselves.
OK.
So these tests are really more of integration tests.
One of the reasons for calling out this distinction is the fact that integration tests are typically
slower than unit tests.
And I think you can even see that whenever I run all of the tests now, they don't go nearly as quickly
as if I had written a whole entire suite of unit tests.
Because unit tests don't depend on talking to a database and waiting for data to go backward and back
and forth and all of that.
They just test pure logic, typically business logic.
So we'll probably cover a little bit more explicitly about integration tests in the next module, and
you'll definitely learn more about integration testing in one of my upcoming courses where we go way,
way deeper into frameworks like the spring framework and things like that.
OK.
So enough about testing.
We also learned how to create our own custom annotations, right?
So let's see if we go back into the person class again.
You'll remember that we created this custom annotation here, the ID annotation, and I can jump into
into its code, and it's just an interface that's really all it is.
OK.
So it's pretty straightforward.
And we also had another annotation that we used on our repository classes like the people repository.
So I'll come up here to the top and remind you that we've got this custom notation here, the at school
annotation that we created from scratch just for our own purposes and then to actually make these annotations
useful because on their own, they don't do anything at all.
We had to process them.
And so we learned about.
Java Reflection API, which allows us to basically introspect our own code at runtime, that is while
the program is running to find fields and methods in our case that are annotated with annotations that
we created in this case.
So we got to do some of that, and I thought that was pretty cool.
That gets you a little more into some of the types of programming that more advanced developers or even
software architects might do.
But you saw that it's really not that hard to do, really.
And so there's no reason why you, even as beginners, can't start to dip your toes into creating your
own annotations and using reflection to find things that you've annotated when it's appropriate to do
or when it's useful.
And then, of course, we learned a whole lot about GDC now.
I mean, we've basically written an entire database layer of application code using low level raw J.D.,
B.S. and J.D. B.S. again stands for Java database connectivity, and that's how we're talking to the
database.
Now, the JTBC API is generally meant to be used with relational databases, and that's what we've been
using in this module H2, which can be used as an embedded database, but it can connect to many other
types of databases.
And in fact, as long as you're relational database has a JTBC driver existing for it, you can use
JTBC to connect to it.
And so many of the most popular databases that you may encounter as a professional developer in a company
would be Oracle database or SQL Server.
Those are probably the top two most popular ones by and large, especially for commercial databases.
And then there are some open source ones that are very popular as well, such as MySQL that's called
MySQL.
MySchool is very popular and PostgreSQL as well.
IBM has one called DB two.
I don't know how popular that is anymore.
I haven't looked at it in a while, but used to be kind of popular among the commercial ones.
And then also now there are many other types of databases that are not relational databases at all.
We did not look at any of those technologies here because by far, to become a professional Java developer,
if you only know how to write code for one type of database, it had better be relational databases.
Now, lots of progressive teams in the world have moved either beyond relational databases to other
types of database technologies, or they use alternative database technologies in addition to relational.
But like I said, if you only know one database technology for right now, it had better be relational
database.
That's just kind of foundational.
And so within the JBC API, let me jump in to our crud repository here.
We learned a number of things, and maybe I'll just kind of roll down this class for a little bit and
remind you of some of the things we learned.
So we learned how to create a prepared statement, and that is the JBC type of class that represents
the sequel commands that we are issuing to the database.
So we can do that either with a prepared statement or just with a regular statement.
Prepared statements have an advantage in that they can be pre compiled essentially by the database itself
so that they can execute more quickly when you actually need them to do something.
And we can bind parameters to them.
Let me remind you of what that looks like real quick.
So here are some parameters that are bound to some sequel.
And by using these parameter bindings with our daily DC prepared statements, we can actually protect
ourselves from SQL injection attacks, which is one of the common ways that hackers can break into or
hack systems.
Because software developers make it a little too easy for them to insert their own sequel into user
input that we are interpreting so we can use prepared statements to help protect from that kind of attack.
And we encountered the sequel exception plenty while while working with this, and you already learned
about exceptions previously, but now you've got a little bit more of a real world opportunity to see
firsthand where they come into play and how they affect our coding.
We spent a lot of time working with results sets, so essentially any time that we execute a statement
or prepared statement, we can get back a result set and you can really just think of the results set
as a table of results.
So you could kind of think of the results set as looking like this red table down here where you get
back a bunch of rows and then you can iterate over those rows by calling usually R-Sport next to go
from one row to the next like I'm doing here.
Results sets have metadata associated with them that can let us determine things like.
How many columns are in the results at table, if you want to think of it as a table?
And what are the names of the columns and the names of any aliases for those columns?
Things of that sort.
So we spent quite a bit of time dealing with result sets.
And then we implemented a much more realistic implementation of the repository pattern.
Now, I don't know that I spent a lot of time really letting you know that my choice to call this class
crud repository and having the other classes people repository and address repository, I didn't just
make up that term repository.
That term comes from a very common design pattern in object oriented programming, which is the repository
pattern.
And basically, the repository pattern, in a nutshell, is a way of making a class that forms an abstraction
on top of a collection of objects.
OK, so if you think of other collection classes like lists and sets and things of that sort, the repository
pattern is supposed to sort of act like an interface on top of other types of collections.
OK, now in our case, we're using the repository pattern to make data from the database sort of feel
like it may be coming from a collection.
That's the original intent of the repository pattern.
However, you will find as you proceed in your journey of learning Java and all of the add on frameworks
that are most commonly associated with it, that the repository pattern isn't usually used purely in
that regard.
And there will be a lot of mixture between the repository pattern being an abstraction over the general
concept of a collection versus or in addition to it just being an abstraction on top of just databases
in general.
There's another pattern that I have not explicitly mentioned, which from the average Java developers
perspective, will look pretty much identical to the repository, and that's called the data access
object or Dayo.
So after you take this course and you get your first job and you're working on a team with a lot of
experienced Java developers, you may find yourself working in a code base by code base.
I mean, just a project in a code base where you don't see any classes that are talking to the database
that are called something repository, but you may instead see a lot of classes that are called something
Dayo.
You may see something like person Dayo or address Dayo.
For the most part, those Dayo classes will be pretty much identical and in functionality to what you
have now become accustomed to seeing here with our use of the repository class.
The duo is another data access pattern.
The real distinction between repository pattern and pattern is that while I said earlier, the repository
pattern is really meant to be more of an abstraction on top of the idea of a collection of objects.
The Dayo pattern is a little more explicitly meant to be an abstraction on top of a database.
OK.
So it's not trying as hard to pretend like it's not sitting on top of the database.
It's more OK with its users that it being the dog class, with its users knowing explicitly that it's
there to bridge between the rest of your code and a database.
Whereas the repository pattern might try a little bit more explicitly to hide the fact that it may be
sitting on top of a database.
And that implies, though, that the repository pattern can be used potentially to not just be an abstraction
on top of a database.
OK, so there's a chance some of you may not fully get that distinction, and honestly, it doesn't
really matter.
Don't worry about it as beginning developers or even intermediate developers, the distinction is going
to be relatively minimal.
OK, so just know that you may encounter projects that don't have anything called repository.
They have something called D&O.
But from your perspective, what those two types of classes may be doing in the code is likely to be
pretty much the same thing, which is to translate records from the database into objects and vice versa.
OK, and then we obviously learned quite a bit of sequel.
So I'm going to jump back over to our people repository and we'll just look at some of the sequel here.
So we learned how to obviously select records from the database and how to insert data into the database
and how to update records that are in the database.
Although we didn't do a whole lot of that, we did.
We did implement one simple update method, though in our people repository.
OK, so within the sequel stuff, obviously we learned how to select for specific columns from from
various tables.
We learned how to rename those columns using aliases by using the as key word, right, so parent that
ID as parent underscore ID how to rename those columns.
We learned how to make those renamed columns show up for us.
We learned how to do that in two ways, specifically with age two database.
Well, one of the ways the way that we settled on and code to do it programmatically should work with
any database.
The other technique where we turned on that flag when we establish our connection to to that approach
is specific to H2, which is why we did not depend on that any further.
We learned how to do table joints.
We learned specifically mostly about left outer joins because usually when we're querying for parent
child relationships, we want all of the parents, even if they don't have any children.
And to do that, you need to do a left outer join.
I mentioned briefly, though, about some of the other join types, such as right outer joints, which
really just flips it around.
So you'd get children who are orphans essentially, right?
So children who don't have a parent, you'd still get the kids with a right outer join.
We've got inner joined.
That's kind of where we started with the whole entire join conversation in which in our case, you'd
only get the parents and children where both exist.
So if there are parents with no kids, you won't get anything at all.
If there are kids with no parents, you won't get anything at all.
You have to have both the parents and the children with an inner join.
So those are some of the more common join types.
There are a few others as well, but you're in good shape to know these ones.
We learned how to execute various functions, though I don't think we coded any use of the database
functions here.
But we did learn towards the beginning of our school journey how to do averaging and math and things
like summaries and group by and things of that sort in school.
All very useful things to do.
Essentially, pretty much a lot of the same tricks that we learned how to do with collections and the
streams API.
You can do a lot of those same tricks in the database as well.
We learned how to create indexes on the database so that we can make sure that our queries run quickly
by making sure that there are indexes on any of the columns that we query by write that look ups have
to occur on that.
And I stated to you that that's one of the things that I've noticed.
A lot of developers don't even seem to understand that they can speed up their application so much by
simply creating an index on those columns.
Now there are some cases where you don't even need to explicitly do it, like where we were creating
tables and then defining foreign keys or primary keys when we're doing that.
Typically, you'll get the indexes created for you automatically by virtue of the fact that you're defining
a foreign key or primary key field.
But if you want indexes on other fields that are not foreign or primary keys or things of that sort,
you can explicitly create those as well.
And we did do that too.
All right.
One one other thing I want to mention, though, is that in this module we did, we did not create a
traditional interface for any of the application coding that we did by interface.
I don't mean a Java interface, I mean user interface, that's what I should have said.
So typically, an application will have a user interface, such as either a command line.
We would think back to our guessing game program that we wrote.
The interface was command line where you had to type it, where it prompted us in text at the bottom
of the screen, and we had to enter values to guess a number and things like that.
So we had a user interface that was based on the command line.
There are other types of user interfaces that we could have implemented.
There are web interfaces where you're in a web browser and that's how you'd interact with your application.
You can have an interface on your smartphone or tablet or a desktop application itself.
Right.
There are lots of interfaces.
However, in this module, our interface here was really just our unit tests themselves.
OK.
And that's not like a real user interface.
That's just the only interface that we bothered to create, because I really haven't taught you how
to create any more advanced types of interfaces yet.
But I just want you to think about that.
The our use of the unit tests essentially can be thought of as the interface into our application.
From our perspective, at least.
All right.
So finally, the last thing I want to mention here is some of the things that I may have left out and
what you will see in your continuing journey down this road.
So I want to remind you again that the reason that we spent so much time in this module and the reason
that we learned the techniques that we did and we called these things in the way that we called them
is because I based almost everything we did here off of well-known frameworks that you will be learning
in the future.
There's a very popular framework called Hibernate, and another one is called spring data, and particularly
with spring data.
When we create database applications using the spring data framework, our programming can look almost
identical to what we did here.
I intended it to be that way on purpose so that when you do learn spring data, it will feel very comfortable
and familiar to you.
So spring data, for example, has a credit repository interface.
It's it's not a class.
If I recall correctly, it's an interface, but they have something called credit repository that you
can implement instead of extending.
And it is generic.
So you must specify what the data type is for your domain model that the repository will be helping
you to manage, if you will.
Now, in addition, with the spring data framework, you not only have to specify what the entity class
type is like.
In our case here, person, you also have to specify what the data type is for the ID property.
So typically that would be like a long or something like that.
Now we could have done that here as well, but we didn't need to as most.
So we just hardcoded our credit repository to just assume that all IDs were going to be of type long.
But I could have generic size this as well by just adding that I just adding another generic type right
here t comma something else like T comma I for ID or whatever.
And then in all the places here where where I'm referring to type long, I could have just used that
generic type right there as well.
And you will find that in the spring data framework, that's exactly what they do.
So they just went another step beyond what we did here.
But I thought that would be going a little bit too far for us.
So I held back on that.
Additionally, some of the annotations that we created well, specifically the Ad ID annotation is going
to look very familiar when we do learn about spring data and hibernate because we use that same type
of annotation with the spring data framework as well.
So that's also going to be very familiar now with spring data.
There are additional annotations that we didn't create here that you will learn, but you will understand
what those other annotations are generally doing because of all the types of work that we did here.
So one of the biggest things that you're going to learn with spring data is the fact that spring data
and frameworks like ID and Hibernate can actually generate the sequel for you like magic.
So all of this cumbersome and tedious sequel that we've been writing explicitly, we didn't need to
write any of that if we were using one of the more modern Java database frameworks like spring data.
So these modern framework, which are generally referred to as object relational mappers, well, technically
their object relational mappers, if they're being used to work with a relational database.
But actually, frameworks like spring data can actually work with more than just relational databases.
So you can write the same types of code regardless of what type of database you may be connecting to.
Though, like I said earlier, relational database is still kind of like the most foundational thing
that you see most common, probably especially in the corporate Java development world.
So anyway, these frameworks, though, can generate all of the sequel for you.
So if that's true, you may be wondering, Well, why did you make us learn all of the sequel?
And the reason for that is that if you do not understand sequel well enough to know how you would have
written the sequel to accomplish what you're trying to do, quite often, you will misunderstand how
these higher level frameworks will generate the sequel, and you'll end up with highly inefficient sequel
and you won't understand why the sequel is inefficient.
I've worked out a lot of places, in fact, where there were developers who were highly skeptical of
using these great frameworks for the most part, hibernate and spring data.
They've just sworn, you know, we're not even going to use these frameworks or they don't use them
to very good effect, usually because they tried to use them in the past.
And the results were very, very slow and cumbersome and inefficient.
And really, they blame the framework, but it's actually not the frameworks fault nine times out of
10.
It's just the fact that they have no idea what they're doing with those frameworks.
And I think it's very, very useful when you're using these frameworks that can generate SQL for you
to first think through what cycle would you write if you had to write it yourself and then consider
what you need to do with those frameworks to get them to generate that same sequel?
OK.
So you still save yourself a lot of time and effort by not having to write out all the columns and all
of these things, but you do still need to think through what would I do if I were writing this myself?
And that's one of the biggest reasons why we went through all of this.
That's one of the biggest reasons why we I spent the time teaching you the various techniques for doing
various types of joining for one to ones and one to many type relationships, which are among the most
common types of relationships you will encounter in these upcoming frameworks.
So as long as you keep in mind how you would write these low level sequel queries yourself, you'll
have a much better time and a much better understanding of how to work with these frameworks like hibernate
and spring data.
And that's something that I see so many developers just completely forget or ignore, or they don't
appreciate.
And then they go down a really bad road with those frameworks, and then either they use them blindly
and very badly with very poor results, or they give up on using them completely.
And then they just blame the framework instead of realizing that it's their lack of understanding that
is causing the vast majority of the problems.
Not to say that these frameworks are perfect, by the way, but they can be used to great effect if
you know how to use them.
All right?
And then maybe one or two other points that I would like to make.
So if I go back over to the tests here, let's see.
So here we are with the people repository declaration here and then down here, we're actually creating
an instance of this repository and we're passing in the connection.
So a couple of things here.
When we learn about these upcoming frameworks like the spring framework, spring data, spring boot,
et cetera, et cetera.
One of the things that you're going to see, and I will obviously talk about this more, but I'm just
giving you a little sneak preview here.
One of the things that you're going to probably not see very often is explicit use of the new operator
here to create instances of important key classes like repository classes.
You will not see us creating new instances of these classes, probably ever.
And one reason for that is because frameworks like the spring framework and there aren't that many in
the Java world.
Really, the spring framework is the most famous one for sure.
Employ a pattern called dependency injection and or inversion of control.
And basically, what that means for you is that the spring framework itself will actually create the
instances of many of these types of very important classes behind the scenes.
So you won't even see the code that's calling new people repository, for example.
And then you can just tell the framework where you want to use that instance and it will inject the
instance into your class somewhere.
So, for example, just as a really quick sneak preview here, if we wanted to have a new instance of
the people repository in our unit, test and use it just like this right here, what you might see instead
of this is some type of annotation where you are specifying to the spring framework, for example,
to please inject a new instance of the people repository into this variable right here that would be
equivalent to having some code somewhere that says create a new people repository and set the repo variable
equal to that.
Now, the reason that frameworks like the spring framework prefer to do it in this way is so that the
framework can manage all of the dependencies that your key classes depend on.
So, for example, the people repository class here depends on having a connection.
Now, I decided to create this class in this way intentionally to prepare you a little bit for when
we learn about spring.
So here is a small example of dependency injection.
We are, in effect, injecting the connection instance into our people repository.
We could have created this thing, this connection directly inside of the people repository class.
We absolutely could have done that.
But instead, I chose for us to created outside of the class and then injected because the spring framework
would have done a very similar thing for us.
So you'll likely see more of that very soon.
Just giving you a little bit of a preview there.
Oh, and then one last thing that I wanted to mention to you about our database connections being created,
and you may recall that our test here is actually using transactions with the database to, in effect,
erase whatever data changes we are making to the.
Database while the tests are running, right?
And so that's what allows us to keep rerunning these tests over and over and over again and not permanently
affect the subsequent tests that are running.
So for example, if we put two people into the database permanently without cleaning up after ourselves
on each test, some of these tests wouldn't work correctly anymore because they make assumptions as
to what data exists in the database before the test runs and what data will be there after the assertion
or things like that.
And so if you'll recall, we set this connection that set out to commit to false to just turn off the
default behavior of the connection, which is to permanently commit whatever changes we're making to
the records in the tables of our database, right?
We turn that off by default, and at the end of each test, we happen to be closing the connection.
Now, let me tell you one thing right now I could have actually included this when I was talking about
optimizations, but I'll just mention it very briefly here.
There's actually an even more efficient thing that we probably could have done here.
I just, for whatever reason, didn't choose to do it this way.
But currently we're using this before each and after each.
And if you'll recall this before each annotated method and after each method run right before each test
and right after each test, right?
So we get a before and before each and then this happens and then the after each and then that that's
done and then it happens again for this test and that test and for each of these tests, right?
Well, and recall, now that we're creating a connection, a new connection now in our before each method,
which means that we're getting a new connection for each and every one of these tests that actually
isn't necessary to do, that's actually a little wasteful.
What we could have done Alternatively, though, we will not do it now, but I will leave it to you
as an exercise.
If you would like to try, it is.
We could have used, alternatively, an app before all method to create our connection.
And then we'd only create one connection for all of the tests to run.
And then we could use an, after all, to tear it down as well.
And then we could also just use an after each method to simply roll back.
So let me even show you real quick what that would look like, I suppose.
So instead of before each, we could do it before all and then instead of an after each, we could do
and after all, and then we could introduce one more method here now, which would be another after
each.
And I don't know what I'll call this real after each for right now.
OK.
And then in here, what we could do now is call connection dot rollback.
OK, now that's going to throw an exception because, you know, it's database stuff.
So I'll just do that for right now.
And so now with this approach, what would happen is we'd only create a connection one time for all
of the tests, and we'd only close the connection one time for all of the tests.
But after each test was done, dirtying up the database with our test data or whatever.
We would roll back, which means to just basically erase, erase whatever changes had been made to the
database tables since the last time we called roll back essentially OK.
So that would in many ways be a more efficient way that we could have done this.
Now one thing I'll mention here is that if you wanted to do it this way, even though I'm not getting
errors here, this won't work on its own because I would need to make the set up method and the tear
down method static.
OK?
They'd have to be static with with this approach.
And that would mean that the connection also has to be static.
So I'm just giving a little warning there that a few things would need to change to make that all work,
but that would, in theory, make the running of our tests a little more efficient.
OK.
All right.
So that's it.
I am done.
Let's get out of this module and get on to bigger and better things in the next module.
So I hope you've learned a whole lot in this module.
Please make sure that you really take it to heart everything that we've learned here because this is
just great stuff.
And plus, we also got a chance to incorporate so many of the other things we've learned throughout
the throughout the course into this module, right?
And so this is huge and a lot of the code that we've written here represents pretty much real world
type code.
We went fairly deep here.
OK.
All right.
So take it easy and I will see you in the next one.